---
layout: post
title: "Rand(), .Uniq And .Send In Ruby"
date: 2020-12-19
categories: ruby
---
Today I will write about three methods in Ruby. I decided to write about it in one post, because, firstly, I heard about them in the same day and, secondly, it isn't necessary to write three posts about every of them - in my opinion they aren't so complicated. <br>
Let's start with first of this methods - <b>rand()</b>. This is very helpful when you need to generate random number or string from specific collection, array etc. This is really easy! Look - in this example, I want to choose one number from 7 to 21 and also need to write it as a string:
<div class="code">
{% highlight ruby %}
rand(7..21).to_s
=> "15"
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
And that's all! It is good to remember that <b>rand()</b> can be use in three ways:
<ul class="list">
  <li>when you don't give any arguments, rand gives you a number from 0 to 1 (for example 0.4836732493)
  </li>
  <li>when you use rand with one integer as an argument, for example rand(7), it gives you a random number between 0 and this number</li>
  <li>you can use rand like me in the example above (rand(7..21)) and it gives you a random number between the start of the range and the end of the range</li>
</ul>
It is time to write about second method - <b>.uniq</b>. It helps to remove duplicates. It is also very easy. For example, we have a specific array and we want to remove repeating numbers.
<div class="code">
{% highlight ruby %}
array = [1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3]
array.uniq
=> [1, 2, 3]
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
Remember that this method returns a <b>new</b> array with unique numbers - it won't change the original array. <br>
We can also use .uniq to remove things because of the length, class etc. Here we have an example:
<div class="code">
{% highlight ruby %}
animals = ["dog", "cat", "parrot", "spider"]
animals.uniq(&:size)
=> ["dog", "parrot"]
{% endhighlight %}
</div>
We can see that in our new array we have only two strings - .uniq remove strings with the same length as the others.
Finally, I can write something about <b>.send</b> method in Ruby. I found the information that this method "sends a message to an object instance and its ancestors in class hierarchy until some method reacts (because its name matches the first argument)." When you call a method, you <b>sending</b> that object a message. <br>
It is very helpful when you have a class with many methods and every of these method also have a few attributes. You want to call all of these methods on your object. If you try to do it step by step, method by method, you will loose a lot of lines of code and waste your time. You can do it faster with .send - just call .send method on an object and write all methods in brackets just in one line. <br>
This method can, for example, be use to call private or protected method from outside a specific class:
<div class="code">
{% highlight ruby %}
class Movie
  def title
    puts "Titanic"
  end

  private
  def best_actor
    puts "Leonardo DiCaprio"
  end
end

movie = Movie.new
movie.title
=> "Titanic"
movie.best_actor
=> NoMethodError
movie.send(:best_actor)
=> "Leonardo DiCaprio"
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

It is good to remember that there is also a method <b>.send_public</b> which not allow you to get to private methods.